I've always thought that the best way to learn something is trying to explain it to other people. With that in mind (and a huge opportunity), I started teaching classes 7 years ago at the same university I was studying at. To this day, I've taught Databases, Algorithms and Software Architecture subjects for Software Engineering careers. It’s a very challenging task, as the topics we cover are evolving at an exponential pace each year. But at the same time, it’s the most fulfilling activity I’ve done in my life. In a way, I feel responsible for how my students see the craftsmanship of software engineering, at least at the beginning of their careers.

Of the subjects I’ve taught, the most interesting one is an elective subject we created to investigate emerging languages, frameworks, deployment models, etc. It works as a workshop where students can bring to the table anything they want to learn about, or maybe compare similar tools they are considering for their projects. We build applications using Grails, Rails, Django, AngularJS, React, etc; then deploy them using AWS, Heroku, Docker, Compose, etc. We also try to cover topics we can’t cover in curricular subjects such as full-text search, NoSQL databases, message queues, push notifications, etc.

Above all, my goal is to keep the students away from the “holy war” of which language or framework is better than the other by making them try them all to identify their strengths, find their pros and cons and decide which is better for what scenario, so that they are able to properly use the phrase “the right tool for the job”. That’s a phrase we all use but seldom really apply. Nevertheless, being in charge of that subject puts a great weight on my shoulders, because I need to stay up to date with everything that’s going on in the tech ecosystem and be able to form an objective opinion about it as fast as possible. However, I have never doubted the value of my work, because it’s extremely gratifying to receive feedback from my students. They sometimes contact me after graduating to get an opinion about something they are working on.

So far, this has been my greatest challenge, but I’m looking forward for the next one.